Good afternoon everybody and welcome
to the WebObjects Overview session.
My name is Bob Fraser.
I am the product manager for
WebObjects and also Java now.
And this is going to be an introductory
overview to the WebObjects technologies.
I'd like to start with
the usual exercise.
Anybody who's using WebObjects,
could you please raise your hands?
Yeah.
And for how many of you is this
the first time you're coming to
a WWDC session on WebObjects?
Okay, great.
So what we're going to cover
is an overview of WebObjects,
some of the things that
Apple is doing with WebObjects,
how to get WebObjects,
and we also have some members of
the community here who are going
to talk about some of the things
that are going on in the whole
general WebObjects community.
So WebObjects is a great set of
tools and frameworks for doing rapid
application development of Java server
applications and web services.
And it's really, really neat stuff.
What you get is the easiest way to
build J2EE compatible applications.
So Java is the way to
do server applications,
at least if you're not Microsoft.
And one of the things,
it's great because it's standards based,
it's cross platform,
it's interoperable with a lot of things,
there's great connectivity
to a bunch of stuff.
But building a real enterprise
level three tiered application,
it almost takes a rocket scientist.
It's a complicated thing.
So if you look out there,
what have a lot of people been doing,
they've been trying to reduce
the scope of effort involved,
come along with tools that can increase
productivity and reduce complexity.
You see that with an example
of the Sun Creator product
that's been announced here.
And at Java 1 is exactly trying
to solve that kind of a problem.
which addresses the same kind of
issues and the same kind of problems.
And what you get is everything
you need to build enterprise
class applications in one box.
So, with WebObjects,
you get an integrated
development environment.
It layers on top of X code or Windows,
and you can it gives you the IDE for
all your editing and rapid prototyping.
It does database mapping.
It includes a full object relational
mapping model that will take you
back and forth between SQL databases
or JNDI data sources and do that
mapping and turn that into objects.
It also gives you some really incredible
assistant and wizard technologies
that let you do code free prototyping.
But then these are extensible and you
can extend them and turn them into
full scalable applications because
they use the powerful frameworks
that are built in that are all very,
very scalable.
It is also now an outstanding
package of web services,
both as a consumer and a provider.
And there are not that many
great web services packages for
providing web services out there.
We think this is a great offering.
And it's one of the more common uses
of it is to do HTML presentations
or three-tiered HTML-based websites.
So the advantages are the usual,
the one things you want to have,
the three things you want
to have in your product,
faster, cheaper, better.
And how that relates here is it
accelerates your time to market.
Because we have a developer tool
chain that walks you through
the process of building these
applications and it's visual.
It's a visual IDE.
So it simplifies this and makes
this much more approachable.
You get better code at the end of the day
because there are years of best practices
that are built into these frameworks.
So we've had a lot of great people
working on this stuff for a long time.
And it's all encapsulated in these
frameworks that come with WebObjects.
So there's usually a tool and
a framework that go together.
And what this does is it does a
lot of the heavy lifting for you.
So a lot of the object
relational mapping,
a lot of the templating,
a lot of the generation of web pages,
a lot of the request response handling,
a lot of these things have been
well designed and baked in.
That lets you worry about
your domain expertise,
the piece that you actually
really want to build and not
have to worry about a lot of the
infrastructure and the plumbing.
and I'm not complaining.
And because you don't
write a lot of code,
you don't maintain a lot of code.
And so your overall cost
of ownership of a project,
of a product,
of a life cycle of something is reduced.
And the other thing you'll see
is you'll see how easy it is
to do incremental development.
And you get an idea and you go, oh,
what if?
Or I need to make this
little change over here.
You'll see how fluid that is.
And that also reduces the
cost of ownership because
requirements are always changing.
People always come up and say,
I'd like the button,
but I want it here and I want
it blue and I want to do this.
And with WebObjects,
that's like really neat and easy to do.
So let's look at a classical
three-tiered application architecture.
And we have on the left
your data access layer.
With WebObjects,
you can talk to JDBC databases
and JNDI data sources.
And then you'll typically
have a business logic layer or
fancy word for if statements.
And then you have different
presentations that you may want to do.
And with WebObjects
you can do HTML based,
web service based,
or rich client based presentation layers.
You get your choice.
So that's kind of like, you know,
when you're mapping out a
nice enterprise application,
you've got your different layers.
WebObjects has a tool and
framework that pretty much works
in each of these different layers.
So let's look at,
that's the architecture.
Now let's look at what the
developer flow would be like.
So with the data access layer,
we have a tool called EOModeler.
So this is the modeling tool.
So what we want to do is we
want to get away from tables
and rows and GNDi attributes,
and we want to model that at a higher
level and get that to the object level.
Once we have this,
now we can operate at a higher
level in our application and
in our application development.
So then we bring it into Xcode,
and we start writing a little
bit of business logic in
Java so everything's portable.
And this is where you would
do your rapid prototyping.
And then from here,
what you can do is you can take it and
use our WebObjects builder design tool
for doing HTML web page generation.
There's a web services assistant
for building web services.
And there's also a way to do
rich Java client applications
in a tool there as well.
Now, one of the interesting things
to notice about this diagram,
if we look in the middle here at Xcode,
we see three lines coming
from that same point there.
You get one model and one set of
business logic that's operating on that,
and you're kind of
presentationally independent.
And so what you can do from
the same model-driven design,
you can actually go to a web page,
go to web services,
or go to a rich client
based on that same model.
Model-driven programming is a
really powerful paradigm here,
and we put it to good use.
And we find it very common
for a lot of our customers and
partners to actually do that.
They'll actually have
multiple applications,
or they'll have multiple
access points driven this way.
So a scenario that might make sense,
You've got some data,
you've got a website.
For the front of the house,
you may want to have a web interface,
HTML based.
People come to your website,
they click on things through an
HTML interface in a standard browser.
Okay, but then you may want
to have an in-house,
behind the firewall DBA app,
where you're updating
like a product inventory.
That you might like to
have as a rich client.
You can drive that off the same model.
And then you decide later on,
you want to automate
some business processes,
so you may want to add some web services,
and that can be lights
out computer to computer.
And all of those can
interact with the same model,
either in the same application,
or you could just build another
quick separate application.
So step one is building the model.
Now what EOModeler allows you to
do is it allows you to reverse
engineer the data source.
So all you need is a JNDI URL and
a JDBC access to a database,
an ESQL database,
and you can basically go in there
and it will find the tables,
the columns, the rows,
and understand all of these
entities and properties.
So, you can use EOModeler for
doing forward schema design.
So, you can drop in entities,
drop in properties and stuff like that.
And it will actually
generate the tables for you.
And we support a wide variety of
databases in this modeling tool and
the mapping layer that goes with it.
Everything from Oracle and
Sybase and FrontBase and
OpenBase and MySQL and MSSQL.
And I'm probably forgetting,
but if you go to the website,
there's a list of a bunch of them.
And then there's other people
who've done plug-ins for like DB2
and PostgreSQL and stuff like that.
So, pretty much you can get out
there and get access to just
about any database that you want.
So, that's the design tool.
Now we have this conceptual model.
So, now the next step.
Well, here's a picture of the tool,
and we're going to have a
little demonstration here.
But one thing to notice is that
we have kind of like an ER entity
relationship diagram here.
This was actually generated by a modeler,
and you can also see that we've also
gotten the relationships as well.
So not only did we
find any of the tables,
any of the properties,
and we now also have the relationships
and the interaction between this.
Now you actually get a
high-level picture of this.
This alone would already be kind of
worth the price of admission for a
lot of people for a lot of projects.
We get so much feedback from
places such as universities.
They've got a lot of turnover.
They're working on grad student power.
And then basically after like five
years or four years or something,
nobody knows what this
thing is doing anymore.
Somebody can pop into the model,
and they can open it up
and look at it and go,
oh, these are the entities,
these are the things that are in there.
Or you could walk up to a database,
an Oracle.
We have people go in and reverse
engineer Oracle databases,
and there's stuff in there.
The DBAs didn't even really
know that they were really still
playing around with anymore.
And you can get a quick
view of everything this way.
What did that just do?
That's what that button does.
Okay.
Sorry about that.
Now, at runtime, we do all of the object
relational mapping for you.
So we do all of the database access.
We do all the data persistence.
So you don't do any SQL.
We do the fetches, the read, writes,
updates, deletes, all that kind of stuff.
And this model and the mapping
is database independent.
So it would be analogous to
container managed persistence.
Only we believe a little
easier to implement.
It's database independent.
And you can also query across
multiple databases simultaneously.
So you can actually build
a model and actually pull
data from like a GNDi source,
pull data from like an Oracle database,
and then actually put those in your
application and mix with those.
So it's nice because you
get transparent persistence,
you get database independence,
and you get the ability to do at a
nice high level data aggregation.
So those are all really nice features.
Cheers.
And with that,
I would like to invite Darrell Lee up
to give a demonstration of EOModeler.
Hi, everybody.
So I just want to show you a modeler.
Can we bring up the demo machine?
Okay, great.
So I just want to show you a
quick reverse engineering demo
and just how easy it is to
reverse engineer a database.
So let's create a new model,
and I'm going to select
a JDBC data source.
And I'm selecting our standard
real estate database that comes
with every copy of WebObjects.
And I'm just going to take basic
defaults here and finish my model.
And, boom, you know,
that couple seconds and we have our
whole database reverse engineered.
As you can see,
we have all of our relationships modeled.
If you look on the left side,
all of these what we call entities
are mapped to your tables.
And if you select the user table,
we also have the attributes or what
we call -- that map to your columns.
So first name would map to
a column in your database.
So if you use the inspector,
you can check it really quickly and that
maps to the user table in the database.
Another nice feature is say
instead of reverse engineering,
you actually want to just model your
database and your schema first and then
you want to blast that to your database.
And just say we had done modeled this
already but it wasn't in our database.
What you can do is select our SQL file.
And then you can see that we
have a SQL generation assistant.
And what you can see here is
that we've composed all the
SQL queries and statements that
you'll need to create the database.
All the foreign keys and primary
keys and constraints you'll
need to create the database.
So with that demo,
it shows you just how quickly you
can get up and running and how you
can model your database in minutes.
Thank you, Darrell.
Okay, we have a model,
a way to get things in
and out of our database.
So now that we've done this,
we can start prototyping.
So the next step would be to
bring this into the IDE and start
writing a little bit of code
and start developing a prototype.
Now, the advantages of this,
what happens in WebObjects is you
get a better way to write code.
It's a better development process.
Basically,
what you do is you start prototyping
the application and you get
something live running right away.
So, contrast this to, let's say,
something like, you know,
the aerospace industry where you're
going to go with a six months design
requirements and then you get a
bunch of programs working on it and
then six months later you decide,
that isn't quite what I wanted.
All right.
This is a much more fluid,
interactive way of working.
Prototype is generated.
is the founder of WebObjects.
He's been running the WebObjects
platform for over a decade.
[Transcript missing]
is the founder of WebObjects.
He's been working with
Apple for over a decade.
He's been
is the founder and CEO of Apple.
He's been working with
Apple since the beginning of
...the application.
Each of these steps along the way,
it's... ...the application.
And so what happens along the
way is continuous integration.
And so... ...the...
So I feel this gives you actually a
better way to develop an application.
[Transcript missing]
So with WebObjects, you get a tool,
a web builder.
WebObjects Builder,
both like a great email editor,
but a concept that it has is
kind of like a binding editor.
And it allows you to actually
tie the data to the page.
[Transcript missing]
is the first person to be on the panel.
He will be presenting
his presentation at the
picture of the and at the bottom we've
got some of the keys and some of the
[Transcript missing]
is the founder and founder of WebObjects.
He's the founder and
founder of WebObjects.
Then at runtime,
what we do is we take an HTML template,
we take data coming from
is the founder of Apple.
He's been working with
Apple for over a decade.
He's been working
[Transcript missing]
Another demonstration here of
building a simple application and
how you can finally modify it.
Thank you, Bob.
What I'd like to show you
is a real simple design.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Bob Fraser.
I'm the CEO of Apple.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Bob Fraser.
I'm the CEO of Apple.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Bob Fraser.
I'm the CEO of Apple.
So the next thing it'll ask me is what
is the main idea that I want to display.
And I'll just pick listing
address to keep it simple.
And in this pane,
it's giving me options to select layouts.
As you can see,
the preview mode gives you an idea
of what the HTML page will look like.
I'll just select this layout.
The first thing we're going to do is
figure out what we want to display,
all the address information.
And then let's just query on the city.
And let's finish that.
In a second, we'll Xcode.
And-- whoops.
Hello.
And let's that really quick.
So as you can see, there's really not too
much complex stuff here.
What we got is a few Java files.
We have one component and our model.
[Transcript missing]
and Bob Fraser: And boom,
we have our results really quickly.
If we search for something
that wouldn't be there,
then we have this table showing.
So let's say I don't like
the way this interface is,
and I want to make sure
this table does not show up.
We can go into WebObjects Builder.
Hello, everyone.
I'm Bob Fraser, CEO of WebObjects.
I'm going to talk about the
WebObjects and the Web Component.
Web Component and the Web Component.
I'm going to talk about the
What that says is if there's
no objects to be displayed,
don't show that table.
And I'm going to save that.
And one great feature about
WebObjects is that you don't
have to always rebuild your app.
If you're editing your WoW component,
a lot of times you can just save
your component and then refresh.
So I'm just going to refresh this page.
As you can see,
I'm not going to compile the app at all.
And boom, our table's not there
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Darrell.
So we've built a model.
We've actually generated a rapid
prototype of an application.
And you've seen how with a
completely visual environment,
we can get in there and
drag out the design.
And it's a very rich tool.
It's got images.
It's got repeat loops.
It's got conditionals.
It's got tables.
It's got all that kind of stuff in there.
And you basically just
drag it all out visually.
And then if you need more
complicated business logic stuff,
this is when you start
putting in the code.
No messing with JSPs or
any of that stuff.
And this is where you can see the
power starts coming in if you need
to do incremental development.
You pop this up.
You add new features.
Save it.
You go.
The rapid turnaround where we
didn't have to stop the app,
build a war, redeploy,
anything like that.
Very seamless, very quick, very fluid.
Keeps your mind going and focusing
on moving the ball forward and
getting the new features in.
Okay, so that's an example of kind
of how you would go about
building an HTML application.
We also do web services.
Now, web services have been
getting a lot of buzz lately.
So we have two definitions
of web services.
One is anything that has something to do
with the web and it might be a service.
And that's kind of like the big one
that you hear a lot about and one that
gets overhyped and everything like that.
Then there's the more narrow
definition of web services.
And the more narrow definition of
web services is really nothing more
fancy than remote procedure code
that we've been doing for 20 years,
only we gave it a name.
But one thing we do is we actually
define a set of standards.
So we do XML, we do SOAP, and we do WSDL.
In a compatible way,
we're getting everything from
all the Java that Sun and IBM and
everybody else is doing and even .NET.
Now this is actually a really good
thing because the reason why this
is a powerful concept and it's
been taking off is that it's a real
killer for application integration.
So you may have different departments
that haven't been talking to each other,
don't even care to,
but if they both implemented web
services and defined an API set,
then both of them can hook these things
together and lights out operation and
don't even have to really bug each other.
And that's why I think
this is really taking off.
The low hanging fruit where we're
actually seeing in this is people at
group and department level who have
like their own archive or store of data
and they want to be able to share it.
And that is really important.
And that is really
powerful and easy to do.
And WebObjects is a great tool for that.
And one of the things I'll
mention is that we do both the
cloud side and the server side.
So the other thing that's kind of
nice about web services is you don't
really have to add a whole bunch.
You know, you've got your application,
you add a layer that's basically
how to call it and how to figure
out what the semantics are,
and then you're done.
And there's a lot of
different ways to get at it.
So now all of a sudden you can
have a WebObjects Java server app,
and you could vend web services
that could be consumed by
an Apple script somewhere,
by Perl, by C++,
by a Java app or .NET app.
So now you've basically expanded
the scope of how you can consume
the services that you're building,
which is always a good thing.
And you empower a new class of
programmers because you don't have to get
into the whole really heavy-duty thing.
If you can write a Perl
script and call a web service,
then you're good to go
and you're in the game.
So built web services, again,
we use the model-driven approach here.
We have a tool for that as well.
And so we can either
consume web services,
get a WSDL and a data point somewhere.
We can actually get that XML,
work with that,
and aggregate that with other
sources and do a presentation layer,
like a web thing that may go and
get like a currency of a website to
do the calculation of the current
conversion or something like that.
We can do that.
You've probably seen, you know,
simple examples of going and getting
like Fahrenheit or something like that.
Okay, that's not terribly taxing
to do that kind of thing.
But taking data sources out of a database
and actually doing the server side,
there's not as many
offerings out there for that.
And what we can do is you
have it in a data source.
We can publish it and we can publish
a web service interface for it.
And any Java code that you have,
you can also wrap that in a method
and wrap that in a service as well.
And so you're the web
service producer game,
which is really exciting.
And we do this without you
having to worry about the XML,
without having to worry about the SOAP,
and without having to
worry about the WSDL.
[Transcript missing]
Which will let you basically go in
and build a server and publish an
interface for consuming web services.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to basically attach to a
database and we're going to show how
we can actually generate complete web
services producing application here
with WebObjects out of the box here.
And so we have Daryl
for another demo here.
Okay, so let's go back to Xcode
and create a new project.
And what I'm going to do is create
a direct-to-web-services project.
will just call this test
direct web services.
And I'll take the default options again.
And here we go back to
our real estate model.
and build and launch.
Now, while that's building,
what I'm going to do is launch
our web services assistant.
So far, Safari is going to come up and
give me a URL that I can use
with the Web Services Assistant.
I need to copy this URL to the
Web Services Assistant and connect
to it and we'll get our app up here.
So the first thing you want to do in your
web service is create a new web service.
So let's start that.
And I see the Web Services button and
we'll just call this a listing service.
Okay,
so now that we have our listing service,
I need to pick some ideas
that I want to publish.
We'll just keep this really simple.
[Transcript missing]
I'll just call this my list operation.
And I need to tell it, okay,
what entity or table do I want
to display or query upon?
And then I want to tell it what
type of operation I want to do.
So I can delete or as an
insert or as an update.
I'm just going to pick search.
So, boom, we have our listing service,
our listing operation.
And the first thing I called is, okay,
what parameters am I going
to pass in to this operation?
And I'll just, similar to our last demo,
I'm going to just take
a city as a parameter,
and I'm going to add that.
[Transcript missing]
Next thing we want to do is figure
out what we're going to return
after our operation is queried.
So I want to return all the
address attributes here.
Okay, so now we've got our return values
and I think we're about ready to go.
Let's just save that really quick.
And I want to test my server.
So we have a nice little
built-in testing assistant.
: I can, without writing a piece of code,
just start making queries
on the application.
So, San Jose,
there is our are going to be returned.
[Transcript missing]
Another great feature of our assistant
is once I've got my operations and
all defined and stuff like that,
we actually compose all the WSDL for you.
So most people,
they have to go out there and
they have to hand code this,
hand edit this,
and figure all this stuff out
and how to bind this and all the
namespaces and stuff like that.
What we do is we give
you all the WSDL for you,
and you don't have to do any of this.
So hopefully that demonstrates just
how easy it is to build a web service.
Are we having fun yet?
So then outside of WebObjects,
Mac OS X and Mac OS X,
So, we have a great web services
development environment because we
bake it into the operating system.
So, you have all of the
services from WebObjects,
but then everywhere in Mac OS X,
either client or server, Apple events,
there are OS-level services that
basically can turn that into
SOAP or XML RPC and back and forth.
And so, you can actually, we have tools.
There's one called Make Stubs.
You'll find on your regular
developer tool CD that if you
give it a WSDL description file,
it will generate AppleScript, Java,
it will generate AppleScript, Cocoa,
or C++ bindings to actually
consume and produce,
to consume that web service.
So, it makes it really easy to build an
end-to-end application because we've
already baked in a lot of the client
stuff already into the operating system.
The transport.
The marshaling and
unmarshaling of data types.
All that's already in the OS.
So, it's really, it's really cool.
So, we've got it in Cocoa.
We've got it in AppleScript.
It's in Perl.
It's in WebObjects.
And so,
we're a great platform for all of that.
And then you can always take that
client and put the web services
side on another client as well.
Okay, and we also have the ability
to build desktop applications
or rich client applications.
So the Web Services Assistant that
you saw there is actually a
WebObjects application that
was generated in Java Swing.
So it's actually generating
that application that we
were using to build the,
to actually configure the web service.
When we hit the test button,
it actually figured out on the
fly what the test button was.
So we figured out what the test
parameters and response types
were going to be and generated the
swing panel for that on the fly.
We also have that technology
baked into ability to build
rich desktop applications also
from a model-driven fashion.
Again, Daryl, please.
Let me put all this stuff up here.
So what I'd like to show you is a
direct-to-Java client location and
how we're taking the same real estate
model and then just reusing it again
to create a desktop Java application.
So let's select that template
and we'll just name this JC.
Okay, we'll take the defaults again and
then just add our real estate model.
And these are some
Java client specific things,
whether you want to download
your classes or you can optimize
that for your efficiency.
And here's some stuff
for configuring WebStart.
So let's just build and run that quickly.
As you can see,
there's not much different in a
direct-to-Java client project layout.
I mean, we still have a certain
amount of Java classes.
There is one Java client component
here that helps you configure some
of the Java client parameters,
but essentially, you know,
a lot of the stuff is in the same place,
and you have your model right there.
So it launched right here.
And as you can see,
we have a fully functional
app out of the box.
Let's just query on
something really quick.
We'll do our San Jose query again.
And boom, this is a different entity.
But as you can see,
there's a bunch of addresses.
If I double click on one of these rows,
we have a lot of detail
that we can configure.
We can delete rows.
We can add new information and
make new relationships with that.
So it doesn't just end here.
You can start configuring your interface.
And what we have is an assistant that you
can bring up and tell it how to present
some of the data or what to present,
what not to present.
So what I'd like to do is just take
away all of these entities that we
were displaying earlier and just
have it show our listing address.
Great thing about all our
rapid turnaround tools is
I don't have to recompile,
I don't have to do anything.
I just have to hit the restart
button in the assistant and boom,
it updates the interface
and everything and boom,
all I have is my listing address
and exactly how I wanted it.
And I can search on San Jose and boom,
there we go.
And if you can notice,
in all these demos,
we've been using just one EO model,
and we've published to web service,
an HTML client, and a Java client.
So hopefully that shows you the
power of what our tools give you.
Thank you, Darrell.
So this is often the
way I'll work myself.
I'll get in there,
go up to some data source called
reverse engineer it with the old model,
and then I'll build a
directed Java client.
And that way I can go in there and
start adding test data or going through
and chaining and browsing through
the sources and seeing what's there.
It's just phenomenal.
Just that aspect of it alone
is phenomenal for exploratory
programming where you're going to
work with some existing data assets.
It's also great for building a
little database administration
tool just right out of the box.
And with the box copy of WebObjects,
if you buy the retail box,
there's a couple manuals
that come with it.
One of them is a manual on
building the HTML applications,
and one of them is a manual on
building the desktop Java applications.
And I believe that'll
get you the hard copy,
but I believe all that same
information is available in either
HTML or PDF form on our website.
There'll be a URL for that to
our reference library later.
Okay.
That's building it.
Now we need to deploy it because
we want somebody else to use
it except just ourselves,
although I could sometimes
sit on my laptop and just look
at my beautiful application.
But in the real world,
somebody else should use them.
So we have two different main ways
of deploying WebObjects applications.
And we have our own WebObjects
deployment frameworks.
And then we also have the ability
of deploying it in a J2EE container.
And you can take the same application,
package slightly different,
and deploy it in a J2EE container.
And you can deploy either with
our application frameworks and web
application server or you can put it
on a standard J2EE application server.
In the case of the standard
J2EE application server,
we just appear as a fat servlet.
So basically,
the request response loop comes in.
It comes in through the servlet handler.
The URL gets transferred to us.
WebObjects stuff does what it would do.
And then the results get
passed up back upstream.
And then you have access to things
like JDI variables and data sources.
Some of the application servers
that we support are Tomcat,
JBoss, IBM,
and BEA's application servers.
So you can basically take a WebObjects
application and you can actually
have the developer tools that you
want but also live within any kind
of a deployment infrastructure
that you may need to live in.
Now the WebObjects deployment.
Okay.
So the WebObjects deployment is
a full-featured cross-platform
pure Java application server.
[Transcript missing]
And then you also have some
configuration and some monitoring
tools that come with it.
And this is not like tiered
pricing or anything like that.
This is just the way the product comes.
[Transcript missing]
It's just a pure Java application
and you can have your database,
the WebObjects application,
and your web browser all
running on the same box.
And then if you need to scale it up,
what you can do is you can add more
WebObjects instances on the same box.
So you basically just run more processes,
run more JVMs, and handle more requests.
Maybe add another data source.
Then you can also scale,
usually what people might do is
they might separate it and have
their web server on one machine,
their database server on another machine,
and then have their application
server on another machine,
right?
So you might go with multiple boxes.
And then you can actually stack
them up and then keep going.
So we support a full clustered
environment of inexpensive units,
you know, and do the scaling that way.
And it's quite scalable and
we'll find out how later.
So WebObjects in Apple, how do we use it?
Just about any way that
money can come into Apple,
it comes in, Java is involved.
And some of that is simple things
like the point of sale systems.
If you go to our retail stores,
there are actually
Java apps running on a Mac.
They're actually Java applications.
But a lot of revenue comes
in through WebObjects.
We use it in dozens of
internal applications,
everything from finding our paycheck,
I think vacation stuff.
We have it on some process management
or inventory management stuff.
We've got bunches of
different departments,
bunches of different people using it.
And it's also used in all
of our Internet offerings.
So it is used if you have a .Mac
account and you have the web mail.
That is actually a WebObjects 5.2
application vending the HTML that's
actually going into the mail.
But a rather important application
that is using WebObjects
is the iTunes Music Store.
The iTunes Music Store.
You may have heard of it.
It's entirely WebObjects 5.2.
and it is running on Panther and
it is running on XSERVs and the
actual music data is on XRAID.
We actually have one of the people
here who works on the software there,
so maybe after the end of this session,
you have some questions on it.
He may be able to talk
about proprietary stuff,
but he could probably
talk about some of it.
It's a really interesting design because,
in a way,
it's kind of a web service application
and an interesting approach.
It's using WebObjects
entirely on the back end,
and then the client is,
there's a Mac native client,
and we just pass XML across the wire.
So it's like an HTTP direct action,
and then the response,
instead of being HTTP, I mean HTML,
is actually XML.
So it's a nice example of being able to
use Java on the back end of the server,
where it's a natural fit,
where people like to use Java,
a way to have a very clean, responsive,
well-integrated desktop application,
use XML across the wire
for the data interchange,
and then we were able to support
the Windows environment with a
different native application,
but still talk to the same client.
So it's a nice example of design, well,
besides being just an outstanding store.
It is the number one music store,
online music store in the world,
and there's a URL that should
have an article talking just a
little bit of kind of a high-level
overview of just what's involved.
I mean, the fact that it's XServe
and X-Ray and WebObjects.
Now, how do you get WebObjects?
There's a free trial version.
So if you go to apple.com/webobjects,
there's a button there, Getting Started,
and it will basically tell you how
to go find our ADC online site,
and you need to get an
ADC online membership,
but that's free.
And then you go to the Download section,
and you can actually download a trial
copy of WebObjects for Mac OS X,
and it's a real full running version.
It's got every feature
that you've seen here,
and you need to download
a 30-day license key.
"But you can download it and try it.
If you're running Panther,
which we hope you are,
the download that's there right now,
we haven't updated it
from the 5.2 version.
So you'll want to hit the
software update button and get
current to WebObjects 5.2.3."
So when you get the download,
you also want to go through
software update and you also
want to update to 5.2.3.
That gives it basically
the Panther integration.
So the current version
of WebObjects is 5.2.3.
There was recently a software update.
And that basically had some performance
and stability fixes and it also
qualified WebObjects for Java 1.4.2.
Now, all of this, unit pricing,
US anyway, is $699.
We also have special
education pricing at $99,
and I don't recall the
government pricing,
but it's around $300, $400,
somewhere in there,
and I'm sure an Apple rep or
somebody would be very happy
to give you that information.
And that includes both a developer
license and a deployment license.
So you get basically one developer
seat and one deployment seat.
And on that, on the box, again,
that's also 5.2, so you'll want to update
via software update.
Then for more information,
the main website to find out
information on WebObjects is
apple.com slash webobjects.
We also include the run times,
the deployment side on Mac OS X Server.
I think if you get
Mac OS X Server right now,
it's at 5.2.2 is the one that's built in.
And so you need to get an upgrade there.
And that brings you to 5.2.3.
And then as a freebie,
we throw in a later version
of JBoss and a later version
of Tomcat in there as well,
because it's in the same
little application download.
That's the, I think the application
servers update on that.
And with XServe or with Mac OS X Server,
if you buy the retail box
Mac OS X Server or if you buy an XServe,
you get an unlimited
WebObjects deployment license.
So if you buy an application
and your target deployment is
going to be XServe or if you're
owing an application for XServe,
there's no run time cost
associated with that at all.
So that's nice.
That saves you right there.
I'm also very pleased to announce
that the WebObjects training
materials have been updated.
So they've been brought
current with WebObjects 5.2,
and there are now classes scheduled.
There have been a number of
tutorials that have been,
or many courses that have been
offered here during this week.
And the ones that were
formerly known as P1 is
Internet Application Development Using
WebObjects.
That's the introductory course.
And then there's also the
Advanced WebObjects Development course.
So that's very good.
And you can find out about
that at train.apple.com.
Hey, WebObjects community.
One of the really exciting things
about WebObjects is the very
vibrant community out there,
very active, very involved community.
And there are a lot of things beyond
the WebObjects things that you get
in the box that you have access to.
So what I'd like to do is I'd like
to highlight a few of those things
that have come from the community
that have actually enhanced,
greatly enhanced the WebObjects
product and the WebObjects experience.
Let me begin by saying,
sorry if I exclude anybody,
there's like a large list of
people out there and there's a
large number of different places
to find components for WebObjects
and information about WebObjects.
You could probably just go to, let's see,
you could probably just Google WebObjects
and find a lot of those just
right off the top of Google.
But I'll highlight a few right here.
And one of the things that has
been asked about a lot is the
ability to do cross-platform
development with WebObjects.
So what I'm happy to introduce are
the folks here for Woe Project.
Woe Project is basically
an Ant build system.
Now, one of the things that's really
interesting about Ant is it's
pretty much the Java de facto
standard now for building things.
And one of the main reasons it's good
is it gives you IDE independence.
So let me say a couple things about IDEs.
Just about any IDE you can want for
Java development is available on the Mac.
and Bob Fraser: And two,
by now I'm hoping everybody is
aware that some nice features
have been added into Xcode,
making it a better Java IDE,
namely code completion and
some ant integration in Xcode.
And if you'd like to see more
about using Xcode for just
plain old Java development,
there's a session
tomorrow morning at 9:00.
I think it's Java development with Xcode.
And you can see some of
those features there,
Java code completion and some
of the ant integration there.
So what we're going to
do is we're going to
"The WebObject would be like one of
the places where that could tie in
is with the Ant build system there.
Another thing that you've been hearing
about at this conference is Eclipse.
And
With Eclipse, there is a plugin that is
available that lets you do
WebObjects application development,
either on Windows or on the Mac,
with Eclipse.
And so now you've got a full Eclipse
plugin that goes in there with that IDE.
is someone here from Project Wonder.
And this is a collection of,
it's a vast collection of a lot of
frameworks and tools that kind of
extend what you get with WebObjects.
So I would like to begin by
introducing Andrzej Malczyk
from ObjectStyle for WebObjects.
I think the mic is off.
OK.
Our project is an app-based
build system for WebObjects.
As we all know,
there are quite a few build
systems that exist already.
One is Make, which is a classic thing and
everybody knows about it.
Not everybody likes it, though.
The other one is CodeBuild,
which ships with Xcode.
Actually,
that's what people use on Mac right now.
We're introducing another build system,
which is a different standard now.
It's called WAP.
There's plenty of reasons.
One that Bob just mentioned
is cross-platform development.
Maybe it's not that, you know,
[Transcript missing]
and more employees are
coming to the event.
You may want to employ on salary
or in less than a year or more.
One of the very important benefits
of WebObjects and Ant in general
platform is the freedom to
[Transcript missing]
WebObjects is a new platform for
web-based software development.
It is a platform for
[Transcript missing]
is the founder of WebObjects.
He is the founder of WebObjects.
[Transcript missing]
is a member of the WebObjects team.
He will be sharing his
experience with us.
and finally there's a little
thing that you can do to
update your app called EOMoral.
[Transcript missing]
We got rid of Project File.
Some tools still in use.
There is Warbuilder that relies
on Project File on Windows.
[Transcript missing]
is the founder of WebObjects.
He is the founder of WebObjects.
[Transcript missing]
and finally,
our project around the community.
The website is www.op.com.au.
Please ask questions.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you Bob.
Once again, I'm the project lead
of the Volelabs team.
I'm here to talk, to give you an overview
of the WebObjects.
[Transcript missing]
is the head of the WebObjects team.
takes it.
Eclipse is a full feature of the Eclipse.
The feature contains everything you need
to know about the state of the art IDE.
Like an
is the head of the
WebObjects team at Apple.
He will be talking about the new
features of the WebObjects app.
[Transcript missing]
Since we have already a whole clip,
we can concentrate on Volip.
[Transcript missing]
and Emma Dollar included.
As an example,
just double-click the component
and you'll find the WebObjects.
will talk about session handling and on.
Set conditions for breakpoints,
replacement or change of values,
and variables.
Steve Imposible, Mutibar Communications,
running on a different machine.
Turnaround is the next episode.
and find more information
about Eclipse and web-based
software for your home page.
covers installation of VOLIPS and
integration integration with
the Eclipse Help System.
To provide feedback
[Transcript missing]
I'd also like to introduce
Max Muller for Project Wonder,
because there's a whole world of other
things that can be added in as well.
Hello.
My name is Matt Mueller.
Currently I'm one of the lead
engineers for the iTunes Music Store,
but also one of the founders of... So,
let's see.
Project Wonder was born actually
with the death of a .NET,
a number of engineers who
actually now work at Apple.
We built a number of
frameworks specializing in
rapid application development.
... as well as just a number of
nice ... to EOF and Foundation ...
frameworks and a lot of ...
[Transcript missing]
: We've seeded the frameworks
to Project Founder 2.0.
[Transcript missing]
It's mainly just a nice collection
point for a lot of open source projects.
Everything from SVG generation,
that Anjo just committed in,
Excel generations.
I have actually WoE components
that represent a bunch of
Excel sheets and tables.
But it's still using WebObjects
Builder and you're just able to
kind of build Excel spreadsheets,
but integrate it in
with all the EF backend.
So, it's just a bunch of kind of
nice frameworks written by...
: I'm a developer who knows
a lot about the technology,
so it also serves as a very
nice reference point for
how would I actually get in,
say, a template parser if I wanted
to change the of a WAD binding,
or some arcane knowledge like that,
and it serves as a good reference point.
Let's see.
We're here to give you a few highlights
of some of the stuff that's found in
some of the frameworks of Project Wonder.
So one of the nice things is
we have a fairly international
group on Project Wonder.
So they've added in kind of
automatic localization support,
so all the Japanese encoding
has taken place.
And it kind of adds support
for all the other encodings
that you'd want and automatic
localization on the way in and out.
Oftentimes you have to worry about
making sure that you're parsing
in the headers for the languages
and kind of getting that correct
on the way in and the way out.
So there's been a lot
of work done into that,
as well as localization down into
the validation messages that pop
up when you forgot to put this
into your model kind of thing.
Another focus has been the rapid
application development process
and taking that one step further.
The configuration management tools
have really helped in the sense
that you can now reload all of
your property files automatically.
You can turn SQL debugging on and off.
You can even change -- we use
log4j throughout the project,
so you can even go in and actually
change the log4j patterns that you're
printing out on the log statements.
And being one of the people who
has to go in and track down a
bunch of really strange behavior
that goes on at the music store,
being able to go in and get a
backtrace in all of a sudden on
some very strange occurring log,
and then being able to look in the
log files and see that start to come
up and exactly what's triggering it,
as well as, say,
the entire request with all the
request values is incredibly helpful.
So it's definitely saved me some time.
So within the direct-to-web stuff,
there's probably about two years
of very advanced development that's
gone on around kind of an overhaul
of a lot of the rule caching systems.
There's over 200 more components that
are useful for doing all sorts of crazy
direct-to-web things in the context
of the rapid application development.
So there's a whole
wealth of things there.
And yeah, I mean, just really,
it's just a lot of --
within the base frameworks,
there's just a lot of really nice
reusable components that shows
how to do fun stuff with the HTML,
fun stuff with JavaScript.
Pretty much kind of all the things that
you think of when you're developing,
but these are, again,
kind of specialty components
that you don't run into
every day or need every day.
So actually announcing
today is the Wonder 2.0.
It's been a long time coming.
I have been stuck in the 1.0
branch forever and getting sick
of maintaining that branch.
Now we are jumping to the 2.0 branch.
Wonder has Eclipse support
using WoeLips and WoeProject.
The whole thing builds with Ant and
works out of the box with Eclipse.
We are finally getting Xcode support in.
We have been dragging
our feet on that one.
Most of the projects should
have Xcode projects now as well.
We are at wonder.sourceforge.net.
We have a fairly active CVS list as
well as an active discussion list.
Check us out.
[Transcript missing]
So that gives you some highlights of the,
you know,
all the different things that are
out there that are beyond just
what Apple does with WebObjects.
So to send feedback or contact us,
there's WebObjects at Apple.com,
and that goes to more than just me.
There's other people
who see that as well.
That's a good way to give feedback.
Another thing that's very important,
if you find reproducible bugs,
then definitely file bugs,
and hopefully can provide
detailed information or test
cases or something like that.
That's always really helpful.
And for more information,
there's the apple.com WebObjects site.
There's also the WebObjects
reference library,
which is available.
You can either just go through
developer.apple.com and
just hit reference library
and look for WebObjects,
or here's the specific URL.
And this,
the reference library has been updated
and contains a wealth of stuff.
It's got,
now it's got an easy way to find
everything from reference APIs to
documentation to tech notes to Q&As.
It's all like easily
navigable from one place.